Gabriel Carroll, Economics Department, Stanford
Answered 8 years ago

What is it like to do research in game theory?
Context: I am an assistant professor in an economics department (so probably have a somewhat different perspective than someone doing game theory in e.g. a pure mathematics, computer science, or theoretical biology department would, though I have a fair amount of contact with the CS game theory community). I work on mechanism design, which I think of as an area of game theory though some might disagree.

Answer: It's fantastic. There is a lot of freedom, but also a particular combination of challenges if you want to do good work.

As a game theorist my work is mostly mental; the main implements are pencils and scratch paper. I think of this as liberating compared to (say) empirical or experimental economics, where there is usually a lot of mechanical or administrative work to do, and certainly compared to the hard sciences where one usually has to spend lots of time in a lab. It means we don't have to stress over funding for equipment or data or travel. It means that it's possible to be productive while in the shower or taking a walk in the woods. It also means that when I have an idea it's often possible to write a paper draft in the space of a couple weeks. (Of course, having an idea worth writing doesn't happen all that often!) The flip side of this is that mental effort can be draining; I'm very rarely able to productively work on a problem for more than a few hours at a time.

I'd also like to second Melissa Dalis's point about game theory being very interdisciplinary. This means one gets exposed to a number of different ways of thinking; it's great if you enjoy variety.

As for the challenges - it's mental work and it requires conceptual and technical skills, but is a different experience than, say, working in very abstract pure math. It's a balancing act, because if you want to do influential work you have to accomplish several things at once. First and foremost, you have to have real-world relevance. There is a lot of admirably technically sophisticated, abstract work in game theory that tends to live in its own narrow world because it doesn't give answers to concrete economic questions. Second, and relatedly, your modeling assumptions need to be interpretable in terms of the behavior of actual humans (or whatever agents you're describing). If your results focus on theoretical constructs like topological conditions on higher-order beliefs, they can leave non-specialists shrugging their shoulders. Indeed, many of the biggest open problems in game theory (in my view) are questions of how to model things correctly so as to describe people's actual behavior, for which our existing equilibrium concepts are inadequate. Third, your contribution has to be technically simple enough that people doing more applied work (or at least other theorists) can use it and build on it, but not so simple as to be trivial or already well-understood.

All this means, among other things, that a lot of the time is spent trying to come up with good questions to ask and good models to ask them in - and not, say, trying to prove already-well-formulated conjectures. It can be frustrating. On a typical day, I go home thinking "another day of trying to have new ideas and not having any." Of course, the other routine parts of academic life - teaching, refereeing, reading new papers, and so forth - help keep that sense of aimlessness from becoming overwhelming.

One other thing to mention about game theory is that it is a declining field. [Edit: This is specific to economics; see comments.] The share of theory articles in top econ journals has dropped dramatically since the 1980s or so. Partly this is because a lot of the low-hanging fruit has been picked, but also major advances in computational power and data availability have spurred advancement in empirical economics and econometrics, while theory hasn't had a similar engine of growth. Also, my impression is that outside of top 50 or so econ departments, theory is often seen as a luxury since economics students at most places are interested in more applied questions. However, I don't feel this decline on a day-to-day basis. On the contrary, I feel part of a broad and lively community and feel that there is engagement with our colleagues who do more applied things - they are interested in our theoretical perspectives, and in exchange their work gives us sources of new problems to think about.